Very short introductions: QC (#4864)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/introduction/tutorials/vsi_qc/tutorial.md

Thus in both cases (paired-end and mate-pair) a single physical piece of DNA (or RNA in the case of RNA-seq) is sequenced from two ends and so generates two reads. These can be represented as separate files (two FASTQ files with first and second reads) or a single file were reads for each end are interleaved. Here are examples:

### Two single files

File 1

```
 @M02286:19:000000000-AA549:1:1101:12677:1273 1:N:0:23
 CCTACGGGTGGCAGCAGTGAGGAATATTGGTCAATGGACGGAAGTCT
 +
 ABC8C,:@F:CE8,B-,C,-6-9-C,CE9-CC--C-<-C++,,+;CE
 @M02286:19:000000000-AA549:1:1101:15048:1299 1:N:0:23
 CCTACGGGTGGCTGCAGTGAGGAATATTGGACAATGGTCGGAAGACT
 +
 ABC@CC77CFCEG;F9<F89<9--C,CE,--C-6C-,CE:++7:,CF
```

File 2

```
@M02286:19:000000000-AA549:1:1101:12677:1273 2:N:0:23
CACTACCCGTGTATCTAATCCTGTTTGATACCCGCACCTTCGAGCTTA
+
--8A,CCE+,,;,<CC,,<CE@,CFD,,C,CFF+@+@CCEF,,,B+C,
@M02286:19:000000000-AA549:1:1101:15048:1299 2:N:0:23
CACTACCGGGGTATCTAATCCTGTTCGCTCCCCACGCTTTCGTCCATC
+
-6AC,EE@::CF7CFF<<FFGGDFFF,@FGGGG?F7FEGGGDEFF>FF

> ```

Reviewer: if you want a side-by-side rendering, [consider using the `code-in` and `code-out` boxes. ](https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/contributing/tutorials/create-new-tutorial-content/tutorial.html#code-box)

> Note that read IDs are **identical** in two files and they are listed in **the same** order. In some cases read IDs in the first and second file may be appended with `/1` and `/2` tags, respectively.
{: .comment}

### Interleaved file

```
@1/1
AGGGATGTGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTA
+
EGGEGGGDFGEEEAEECGDEGGFEEGEFGBEEDDECFEFDD@CDD<ED
@1/2
CCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAAC
+
GHHHDFDFGFGEGFBGEGGEGEGGGHGFGHFHFHHHHHHHEF?EFEFF
@2/1
AGGGATGTGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTA
+
HHHHHHEGFHEEFEEHEEHHGGEGGGGEFGFGGGGHHHHFBEEEEEFG
@2/2
CCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAAC
+
HHHHHHHHHHHHHGHHHHHHGHHHHHHHHHHHFHHHFHHHHHHHHHHH
```

Here the first and the second reads are identified with `/1` and `/2` tags.

> <comment-title>FASTQ format is a loose standard</comment-title>
> FASTQ format is not strictly defined and its variations will always cause headache for you. See [this page](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/docs/submitformats/) for more information.
{: .comment}

## What are base qualities?

As we've seen above, FASTQ datasets contain two types of information:

- *sequence of the read*
- *base qualities* for each nucleotide in the read.

> The base qualities allow us to judge how trustworthy each base in a sequencing read is. The following excerpt from an excellent [tutorial](http://chagall.med.cornell.edu/RNASEQcourse/Intro2RNAseq.pdf) by Friederike D&uuml;ndar, Luce Skrabanek, Paul Zumbo explains what base qualities are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The base qualities allow us to judge how trustworthy each base in a sequencing read is. The following excerpt from an excellent [tutorial](http://chagall.med.cornell.edu/RNASEQcourse/Intro2RNAseq.pdf) by Friederike Dündar, Luce Skrabanek, Paul Zumbo explains what base qualities are:
```

>
>    **Element** (AVITI). This datasets contains forward (r1) and reverse (r2) reads for two samples---`s1` and `s2`:
>
>    ```
>    https://zenodo.org/records/10870107/files/elem_s1_r1.fq.gz
>    https://zenodo.org/records/10870107/files/elem_s1_r2.fq.gz
>    https://zenodo.org/records/10870107/files/elem_s2_r1.fq.gz
>    https://zenodo.org/records/10870107/files/elem_s2_r2.fq.gz
>    ```
>
>    **Illumina**. This datasets contains forward (_1) and reverse (_2) reads for two samples---`bl` and `ch`:
>
>    ```
>    https://zenodo.org/record/5119008/files/M117-bl_1.fq.gz
>    https://zenodo.org/record/5119008/files/M117-bl_2.fq.gz
>    https://zenodo.org/record/5119008/files/M117-ch_1.fq.gz
>    https://zenodo.org/record/5119008/files/M117-ch_2.fq.gz
>    ```
>
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/datasets_import_via_link.md %}
>
> 3. Check that the datatype is set to `fastqsanger.gz` (Galaxy usually automatically assigns the right datatype, but check anyway).
>
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/datasets_change_datatype.md datatype="datatypes" %}
>
> 4. Create a paired collection from your data (relevant part beging at 0:57 and and the case of this tutorial we have 4 datasets): 
>

> >    <iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/uZUt9XIHUQo?si=F0qUj76L_lrM7R2j&amp;start=57" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/collections_build_list_paired.md %}
```

perhaps you'd like to add this video (which is captioned, good!) to that snippet?

Author: I really want to keep the video as is at the moment. I will make a new one later. This is a draft anyway
